Last edited: 04/22/2026 4:55p. EST

# What Went Right
The process of implementing the core treebuilding logic and printing out the trees went very smoothly. I found that testing using a small number of hand-made sequences that are meant to test specific edge cases during tree construction produced the exact tree topology that I expected. Further, the process for simulating evolution to generate the testing sequences via `toy_data_generator.py` was very satisfying to make, and it further demonstrated that the treebuilding logic worked as intended. The toy data itself varies the mutation rates between all the genes to model conservation, and I found that the individual trees for each of the genes had a lot of variance, but as the number of allowed mutations between ancestor and descendant increased, the trees generally became more reasonable. This and the stark differences between the trees for the hominid species demonstrated to me that the gene choice has a huge impact on tree generation. 

I'm also quite happy with how I was able to get the data downloading script up and running. I'm still not entirely satisfied with it, as I'd like to try out different databases and running more quality checks on the data I download, but all things considered I'm pretty happy with it as my first foray into using Entrez and querying for sequence data. 

# What Went Wrong or Was Hard
I think that a lot of my obstacles in this project were less related to the tree-building itself but moreso the issues around data acquisition and testing. 

When creating the toy data generation script, I discovered that my shortcut for naming internal nodes that works for bottom-up tree construction fails when you try to build the tree in a top-down sort of way (which is what that function does). The toy generator uses human-readable names for the internal nodes like "ABC" or "DE" (the parent to both B and C), but this is incompatible with the fact that I shortcutted Newick String generation for my tree objects by relying on each internal node to have their name set to the Newick representation of the substree that descends from them. The workaround that I used to save time was a `fix_internal_node_names` function that goes through the tree from bottom up to change each internal node's name to be compatable with my shortcut. This required the layers of the tree to be known, which is thankfully true for the tree built by this script, but is never applicable in other contexts. If I had to go back and do it again, I would take the time to just make the Newick string creation actually traverse the tree so the internal nodes' names won't actually matter. This will likely be one of the first things I fix after the semester ends. 

Interestingly, I found that with the toy data, the more mutations I allowed between a species and its ancestor, the more accurately the tree was able to be resolved. Each toy gene made by the generator bumps up the allowed range of mutations by 1, so gene 0 allows 0-1 mutations when going from parent to child, gene 1 allows 1-2, gene 2 allows 2-3, and so on. Gene 0's fasta file is filled to bursting with sequences that maintain their ancestral state with no changes, causing a lot of nodes on the expected tree to have limb lengths of 0. This, as one might expect, caused the distance matrix and tree based on this gene to be very weird. The subsequent trees became progressively more reasonable as each species was allowed to deviate more from their shared ancestors. It was interesting to see that the tree made from each species-pair's mean distance across genes held up and matched the groupings made by gene 4, despite none of the individual distance matrices having particularly extreme values. The only thing that the algorithm struggled with on the toy data was resolving the placement of species F, which was meant to be an outgroup to the entire rest of the tree. Even the reasonable trees placed it as a sister species to A instead of correctly identifying it as an outgroup to every other clade. I have to wonder if the assumptions inherent to Neighbor Joining as an algorithm make it have a hard time identifying such an extreme outgroup, instead causing it to mistake F for a fast-evolving member of another clade. This could be supported by how long of a limb length all of these trees tend to give F. 

After my treebuilding logic performed well on my the toy data that I'd generated, I hit two big problems with the actual hominid data. The first was downloading it in the first place. Born out of my desire to not have to write a detailed explanation of how to download the data I used, I elected to write a python script to download the fasta sequences FOR the user. This is really convenient for the user and helps a lot with reproducibility. However, it was *debatably* (read "absolutely") more effort than just doing it by hand and writing out instructions for the user to do so too. This was my first time working with Entrez to query NCBI data and it shows, as I hit every problem imaginable. The first one was that the documentation refused to explain how the handles I got back from my API requests would need to be read, much less how they're formatted. You'd be reasonable to assume that you just use `Entrez.read(handle)`, but the documentation fails to tell you that some handles are mean to be served using `readline(handle)` and others are actually meant to be read by using `handle.read`. The documentation also tells you that some keyword arguments for its searching functions are meant to take only a narrow range of legal strings to specify options/modes, but it fails to specify what those legal options are most of the time. I also had a hard time selecting which database I wanted to use. The ortholog databse appears to only be available via the command line, so as perfect as that would be for my application, I'd need to have put this functionality into a bash script (I'm seriously considering this as a change after the semester ends). Nucleotide was the only option according to the Entrez documentation that actually lets you specify that the sequences you get back are formatted as fasta. The problem with nucleotide is that it seems like it really wants the gene symbol specifically. For example, with the search term "Homo sapiens\[Organism] AND NAD Kinase\[GENE]" returns 0 results, but "Homo sapiens\[Organism] AND NADK\[GENE]" actually returns results. Additionally, if a species had a predicted ortholog for a human gene symbol, the top result tended to be the species in question's full genome assembly, with the predicted sequence being maybe the second, third, or fourth result down. This forced me to check the length on the sequences I was downloading before I committed them to writing. This isn't perfect, as the cutoff I picked (50,000) was actually too high, as TP53 has a sequence around 36,000 bp long for the human sequence, with the header indicating it includes a lot of surrounding regulatory elements and whatnot, versus around 3000 for every other hominid. I'm considering adding a list of "blacklisted" terms with the terms that tend to appear in the headers of things like full assemblies, contigs, scaffolds, chromosomes, and anything else that would indicate that a sequence is more than just the gene of interest. I'm not sure if that's more robust than just checking the length, but it could be more flexible. 

The second issue with the hominid data was that the trees those sequences gave rise to were utterly deranged. I tried switching from Smith-Waterman adapted for distance to Hamming and Jaccard, and the trees didn't get any better or worse. Switching to Hamming distance or Jaccard distance did massively help the runtime (with 6 species, each gene took about 5 minutes to build the distance matrix using Smith Waterman, versus about 2 seconds with either of the other distance metrics), and since the quality of the trees didn't really change. The success my algorithm was having with the training data indicates that the core treebuilding logic isn't massively flawed, which leads me to think that this might have more to do with how rushed my data download script feels and how I didn't really find the time to implement anything to verify the quality of the sequences I downloaded. Part of the issue was that I noticed the top of the search queries would be flooded with mRNA sequences for the genes in question, which makes me algorithm's distance calculations vulnerable to alternative splicing. If I had to do it again, I would probably try using another database to see if there's an easier way to ensure that my search results are just the genomic sequence for the gene of interest, rather than a shotgun assembly or an mRNA transcript. Testing out different databases is definitely going to be one of the first things I add after the semester ends. 

# Algorithmic Lessons

I discovered that the minimum number of species required for Neighbor Joining to resolve a tree was, in fact, four species, rather than three like I'd assumed. While it's possible to think of a tree with only three species, such as (A(B,C)), because of the way that Q is calculated to resolve which pair of species should be joined at each iteration, a matrix with only three species on it will always give rise to a Q matrix where all six non-diagonal positions have the same value (see `IMPLEMENTATION.md` for the detailed explanation). This was something I had not needed to think about until I was deciding how to generate my testing data. 

I had started this project using the `textdistance` package's `smith_waterman` class to perform local alignments and derive my interspecies distances from that. While this resulted in acceptable runtimes for the short sequences in my toy data, I'd failed to consider that setting up an entire dynamic programming matrix just to grab the maximum value would be extremely time-inefficient for sequences that are thousands of base-pairs long. This led to a runtime of around half an hour to create the distance matrices for three genes with six species. I had chosen to use an adaptation of Smith Waterman to calculate distance because I believed it would be more robust to differences in sequence length than something like Hamming distance or Jaccard distance. When I attempted to identify why my hominid trees came out so weirdly during early runs, one of the first things I tried was changing the method for calculating distances, which led to me trying out Hamming and Jaccard distance. Not only did I find that tree quality didn't massively change when using Jaccard distance on my testing data, but my runtime was now blazingly fast. Instead of approximately 10 minutes per gene with six species, `main.py` was finishing distance matrices and trees within a matter of seconds per gene with the same number of species. It was interesting to see the differences in how the trees came out when the distance metric of choice was substituted for another, namely that it seemed to be significantly less impactful than the choice of gene. I found it particularly interesting that this change to distance calculations offered a significant boon for my script's runtime with little, if any, tradeoff for accuracy. 

I do feel that I should have chosen a better evaluation method to check the correctness of my treebuilding algorithm. I mostly relied on looking at the topology for the toy data I'd generated with a pre-determined phylogeny in mind, which is not a method of testing that plays particularly nice with gene choice being even slightly impactful for tree topology. Because the individual genes gave rise to such different trees, this evaluation method of checking the tree topology against a pre-determined phylogeny or to the consensus honinid phylogenetic tree from literature made it impossible to discern what the source of a tree's discrepancies from the expectation was. Attempting to evaluate the correctness of my model in this project was a harsh lesson in the importance of considering the assumptions inherent to my choice of evaluation method and whether it holds up in all of the cases I'm trying to test. While I can infer from the toy data that it's doing something right because of how a couple of the genes come to reasonably close phylogenies, the way that I've chosen to test my outputs doesn't give me a way to tease apart if that failure to correctly place species F is due to assumptions inherent to Neighbor Joining or just flaws in my implementation. Using a standard tool as a comparator would have been a vastly superior evaluation method, as having a tree with outputs I can trust lets me elucidate where discrepancies from my expected trees are coming from. If the standard tool and my implementation both were to fail to make the correct tree based on a given gene, then I would know that the gene or my algorithm choice is the issue, rather than how I implemented it. I'd like to think that I did the best I can with the evaluation method I'd chosen for myself at the outset given the lack of time to pivot to comparing to a standard tool. Needless to say that I'm a little unsatisfied with my method of evaluation, and using a standard tool (such as `Phylo`'s treebuilding functionality) will be among the shortlist of changes I'm looking to make as I work on this project on my own time after graduation. 

# Future Directions
- Adding features that were cut for time
    - `main.py` checking if a gene doesn't have a fasta in `/data/` 
    - `main.py` checking if a species is missing from one or more of the files
    - having `main.py` attempt to download the missing data identified in the two steps above
- Testing another NCBI database 
    - nucleotides was convenient because of the format of the data it gave back, but its searches were weirdly inflexible
    - Gene might be more appropriate than nucleotide
    - Due to lack of experience with Entrez, I want to spend some time playing around with it to compare the handles it gets with `efetch` from different databases
- Comparisons with other tools as an evaluation method
- Making the construction of the "mean" matrix more robust against any species missing species by figuring out what row/column each species correlates to on each distance matrix. This would allow a species that is missing from one gene's distance matrix to ignore that one gene's distance matrix when calculating the mean for each of its interspecies distances. 
# Generative AI Disclosure (If Used)
I did not use generative AI in any way while working on this project. I probably would've saved a lot of time if I used genAI to summarize the documentation and usage of Phylo and Entrez because the existing Phylo cookbook was not nearly as helpful as I'd hoped it would be. 