# Evidence of Correctness

I used a series of testing sequences that came from a pre-determined phylogenetic tree to evaluate the correctness of the topology of the trees my algorithm generates. This panned out to be a flawed method of evaluating correctness due to uncertainties in where any deviation from the expected tree comes from. 

The testing example in `tree_building_utils.py`’s main function (which can be printed by running `python3 scripts/tree_building_utils.py` from the terminal) comes out with the correct topology on all genes despite the edge cases I wrote in by hand. This example just used four species with relatively short sequences to model two sister clades, each with two species. The sequences for this were generated by creating an ancestral sequence that I pasted into all four species' entry in the sequences dict during testing. I then made a change that was shared by species B and C and a separate change shared by A and D, and a subsequent set of changes unique to each species. This was meant to model the divergence of A+D and B+C from a common ancestor and the subsequent divergence of A from D and B from C. The sequences I used in this test were meant to see if the algorithm would be able to correctly group the species when A and D's common ancestor maintained the sequence from the entire tree's common ancestor, seeing if B and C are still grouped together when C has an inversion of the mutation C shares with B, and seeing if B and C are still grouped together when C suffers a deletion that partially deletes the mutation that B and C inherit from their common ancestor. In all three of these cases I tested, the trees came out with the expected topology. 

Toy data from toy_data_generator.py further tests the topology of the trees based on a series of individual genes, as well as demonstrating the toplogy of the 'mean' tree. Since the toy data is generated by coming up with a tree in advance and using that to simulate the mutation and inheritance of sequences from an ancestor, the expected topology is the same for each gene and deviations from the expected topology are inferred to either come from the influence of gene choice on the output or from the tree building logic being faulty. These two explanations can be teasted apart based on if any of the trees generate correctly. 

The trees from the toy data came out with dubious topology when the simulated evolution process for a given gene allowed too few mutations between a species and its ancestor, as the gene that was allowed to generate with between 0 and 1 mutations from its ancestor came out with a tree that made nonsensical groupings and had a lot of species with limb lengths of zero. The graph that showed the distance between each species and its ancestor (`expected_gene_0.png` generated after running `toy_data_generator.py`) demonstrates part of the issue with this gene, as many of the species fail to deviate from the common ancestor that they share with other species. This results in a lot of nodes that the algorithm will have difficulty placing due to the lack of divergence making it ambiguous which species should be grouped together. 

Still gene 4 and the mean both come out close to correct, with the sole deviation from the expectation being that F is placed as a sister to species A instead of as an outgroup to the whole tree. This could be a consequence of assumptions inherent to Neighbor Joining making it averse to placing something as such an extreme outgroup. Perhaps on distance matrices like this, an extreme outgroup like F is difficult to distinguish from a member of one of the in-groups that happened to accumulate mutations faster than its relatives, and when it can't distinguish the two it just choose to cluster it with something. This would explain the algorithm consistently mistaking F as as sister to A with a particularly long limb length. 

The hominid trees were highly volatile and dependent on gene choice. All of the trees have positive limb lengths and appear to not be technically broken, but the species that get grouped together are somewhat nonsensical. The expectation that they were being compared to was the topology from the tree from Rocatti and colleagues (2019) and the tree from Pontzer (2012). These trees indicate that the two members of *Pan* (*paniscus* and *troglodytes*) form a clade with *Homo spaiens* as a sister group. Then members of *Gorilla* from a group that is the sister to that group, and the members of *Pongo* (*abelli* and *pygmaeus*) are the outgroup to the entire rest of the tree. The most correct trees generally deviated from expected by swapping Homo sapiens with a member of the panins and swapping gorilla with a member of pongo (as was the case for ). The mean is however makes less forgiveable swaps and is generally very poor. The means for each of the distances may have been affected by the genes that gave rise to the worst trees, such as TP53. The tree for TP53 had a human sequence of length 30k, whose impact is felt through all of the other species having incredibly short limb lengths and humans having an extremely long limb length. This tree demonstrates to me that the quality of the data I downloaded had profound impacts on the trees I generated. 

The fact that the toy data comes out generally well points to the tree building logic checking out and that the issue lays with gene choice/data quality, since data download was rushed and lacks a lot of quality checks that I would've liked to have added (such as ensuring that I'm getting a genomic sequence and not mRNA, or that the sequence is from a trusted assembly). Seeing how impactful gene choice was on tree topology, it would have made my evaluation of correctness easier if I had used a standard tool's output on the same data as a reference to compare my outputs to. 

While I was working with `Phylo`'s documentation to understand the process of printing a tree, I discovered that the `Phylo` package has functionality for calculating a distance matrix and for constructing a tree. I would like to try using that as a comparison point for my outputs, as that would allow me to more clearly diagnose if the issue is the treebuilding logic as I impemented it or if it is being driven by the quality of my data. This gives me another future direction to take this project in after the semester ends. 

Last updated: 04/22/2026 at 4:55p. EST

## References: 
Pontzer, H. (2012). Overview of hominin evolution. Nature.com. https://www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/overview-of-hominin-evolution-89010983/  
Rocatti, G., & Perez, S. I. (2019). The Evolutionary Radiation of Hominids: a Phylogenetic Comparative Study. Scientific reports, 9(1), 15267. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-51685-w  